JLBP: Declare all dependencies (#1767)
GoogleCloudPlatform/cloud-opensource-java: docs/JLBP-0022.md

---
jlbp:
  id: JLBP-22
permalink: /JLBP-22
---

> # Declare all dependencies

Reviewer: Should this refer explicitly to _direct_ dependencies somehow?

Author: yes, done

> If your code references a class—for example, by invoking a method in that class—declare a dependency that includes that class in your pom.xml, build.gradle,

Reviewer: The varying line lengths make this hard to review. Can you run mdformat?

Author: -bash: mdformat: command not found

> If your code references a class—for example, by invoking a method in that class—declare a dependency that includes that class in your pom.xml, build.gradle,

Reviewer: Is there a formatting practice for referring to files? Should this be `pom.xml` or _pom.xml_?

Author: I don't think we've chosen one yet. Might be worth checking general google style and general cleanup.

or equivalent. In Bazel this practice is called "strict deps".

> Code should not call methods, reference fields, or instantiate classes from _indirect_ dependencies. These are dependencies of the declared dependencies. Projects that rely on indirect dependencies tend to break in unexpected ways when direct dependencies are upgraded. 

Author: I think the point is clear.

> Code should not call methods, reference fields, or instantiate classes from _indirect_ dependencies. These are dependencies of the declared dependencies. Projects that rely on indirect dependencies have an annoying habit of breaking in unexpected ways when direct dependencies are upgraded. 

Reviewer: Maybe there's something less judgmental to say instead of "have an annoying habit"? What about just "can break unexpectedly"?

Author: done

For example, your project might declare a dependency on the 

> Google HTTP Java Client which

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Google HTTP Java Client, which
```

Author: I think this is a restrictive clause, but it's arguable.

Reviewer: If it were restrictive, that would mean that there are several Google HTTP Java Clients, only one of which depends on Apache HTTP Components. Is that the case?

Author: That's one way of identifying restrictive subordinate clauses, but a little more generally, "A restrictive adjective clause, on the other hand, is essential to a sentence and should not be set off by commas" <https://www.thoughtco.com/restrictive-and-nonrestrictive-adjective-clauses-1689689>

I think this clause is indeed essential to the sentence.

A better reference than that will have to wait until I get back to the office to retrieve my Chicago Manual of Style. :-)

Reviewer: The content of the clause is important to the meaning of the paragraph, but not essential to the sentence.

"For example, your project might declare a dependency on the Google HTTP Java Client."

That doesn't change the reader's understanding of what you mean by "the Google HTTP Java Client", although it leaves out an important detail about why you're talking about it.

Compare to your sentence above: "Projects that rely on indirect dependencies have an annoying habit of breaking in unexpected ways when direct dependencies are upgraded." If you got rid of the restrictive clause and changed it to "Projects have an annoying habit of breaking in unexpected ways when direct dependencies are upgraded", the reader wouldn't know which projects you were talking about.

Anyway, it's your document.

Author: The point is "essential to a sentence," which clause this is. It is not whether it is essential to the meaning of the modified noun or noun phrase.

> itself depends on the Apache HTTP Components. If so, it is possible to use the `org.apache.http.client.utils.URLEncodedUtils` method in your own project without

Reviewer: `URLEncodedUtils` doesn't look like a method.

Author: fixed

explicitly declaring a dependency on Apache HTTP Components. However, you should

> add the dependency anyway. This way if a future version of the

Author: rewrote

Google HTTP Java Client no longer depends on Apache HTTP Components, your code

> still compiles. Strict dependencies also help static analysis tools better understand a project.

Author: Not needed

> still compiles. Strict dependencies also help static analysis tools better understand a project.

Author: bazel does call it "strict deps" bit otherwise we try not to abbreviate

> still compiles. Strict dependencies also help static analysis tools better understand a project.

Reviewer 2: If I'm asked from somebody about this static analysis tools, I cannot answer it. Would you help me in this regard?

> still compiles. Strict dependencies also help static analysis tools better understand a project.

Reviewer 2: Bazel call it in that way, but this document does not name this practice.

> still compile and work. Strict dependencies also help static analysis tools better understand a project.

Reviewer: Do you need both "compile" and "work" here?

Author: no, removed

> still compile and work. Strict dependencies also help static analysis tools better understand a project.

Reviewer: I think you could start a new paragraph with "String dependencies...." It's starting a new idea.

> This doesn't only happen when a project itself is upgraded. It can also

Author: rewrote

> happen when dependency mediation selects a different version of a library's dependency 

Reviewer: Maybe give examples of when dependency mediation might change versions other than when you change your declared dependency versions.

Author: I'm hesitant to have a single sentence paragraph.

> that does not include the necessary indirect dependency. Relying on indirect dependencies can cause problems for your customers that you don't see. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
that does not include the necessary indirect dependency. Relying on indirect dependencies can cause unexpected problems for your customers. 
```

"customers that you don't see." or "problems that you don't see"? I felt the latter and "unexpected" is more clear.

Author: rewrote

IDE autocomplete suggestions are a common way projects come to depend on 
indirect dependencies. When importing a new class, most IDEs only look to see if it's present in the classpath, not whether it comes from a direct or indirect dependency.

The `mvn dependency:analyze` command lists dependencies a Maven project uses 
but hasn't declared:

```
[WARNING] Used undeclared dependencies found:
[WARNING]    org.apache.maven.resolver:maven-resolver-impl:jar:1.4.1:compile
[WARNING]    org.apache.maven.resolver:maven-resolver-api:jar:1.6.1:compile
[WARNING]    org.apache.maven:maven-core:jar:3.6.3:compile
[WARNING]    org.apache.maven:maven-model-builder:jar:3.6.3:compile
```

These should be added to your pom.xml file. 

> The tool also lists dependencies the project declares but doesn't use:

Reviewer 2: You want to reference JLBP-1

Author: No, that's something different

Reviewer 2: Never mind. I thought JLBP-1 mentions declared-but-unused dependencies.
